Rising levels of Air Quality Index (AQI) have turned out to be a major concern in the last few years. To take informed steps, forecasting of AQI levels is important to warn people and take prevention measures. This study aims to build prediction models using different suitable Machine Learning approaches, including Multiple Linear Regression, Support Vector Regression, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, XG Boosting and K-Neighbors Classifier. For this, a dataset containing daily AQI as well as different pollutant concentration for 26 cities of India for a particular time period has been collected and analysed across wide dimensions. Different ML regression models have been built on the dataset and Root Mean Squared Error, Mean Absolute Error, and Coefficient of Determination have been considered as metrics to judge how well the models are able to predict AQI. The performance of the classification model has been evaluated through accuracy, precision and recall scores. It was observed that though none of the mentioned models yielded too weak predictions, ensemble-based tree models, i.e., Random Forest and XG Boosting models were able to predict AQI most accurately. Classification model was also able to capture the AQI Bucket in most of the cases, but there remains scope of improvement of its performance. To ensure best results from each model, the parameters of each model (except Multiple Linear Regression) have been hypertuned before fitting the models on the training data. Such predictive modelling can serve as a valuable decision-support tool for policy makers and environmental agencies in mitigating the health impacts of poor air quality.

